Our final discussion in
basic text processing
is segmenting out sentences
from running text.
So how are we going to
segment out sentences?
Things that end in exclamation points or
question marks,
that's really great, because
those are relatively unambiguous cues that
we've gotten to the end of a sentence.
Periods, unfortunately,
are quite ambiguous.
If you think about it, a period can be
a sentence boundary, but periods are also
used for abbreviations like Inc., or Dr.,
they're used for numbers like 0.02 or
4.3, so we can't assume that
a period is the end of a sentence.
So what we need to do to solve the period
problem, is build ourselves a classifier.
We're going to build a binary classifier,
that looks at a period, and
simply makes a binary yes/no decision.
Am I at the end of a sentence?
Am I not at the end of a sentence?
And to make this classifier,
we could use hand-written rules,
we could use regular expressions, or we
could build machine-learning classifiers.
The simplest kind of classifier for this
is a decision tree, so here's a simple
decision tree for deciding whether
a word is an end of sentence or not.
So, a decision tree is a simple if then
procedure that asks a question, and
branches based on
the answer to the question.
So we say, am I in a piece of text that
has a lot of blank lines after me?
Well if so,
then I'm probably an end of sentence.
What if there's no blank lines after me?
Well, is my final punctuation
a question mark or
an exclamation point, if so, well then
I'm still probably end of sentence.
Well if not that,
is my final punctuation a period?
If it's not,
well I'm not an end of sentence, but
if I am a period, well then, it depends.
If I'm on some long list of abbreviations,
like the word etc., then I'm probably not
an end of a sentence, I'm just a period
marking an abbreviation, like Dr., or etc.
But if I'm not an abbreviation,
then I'm end of sentence.
So here's a decision tree.
And you can imagine, arbitrarily,
sophisticated decision tree
features that we could use.
So, one thing we can use is the case,
or it's called the word shape,
of the word with the period.
Am I an uppercase word?
Am I a lower case word?
Am I all caps or uppercase,
meaning the first letter's uppercase,
lower meaning it's lowercase,
cap meaning it's all caps.
Am I a number?
Any of these kind of word shape
features can give us information.
An all caps word is very
likely to be an abbreviation.
We can look at the word with the period,
and we can look at the word
after the period, if the next word
starts with a capital letter, then I'm
likely to be the beginning, a period that
ends a sentence, because the next word
starts with a capital letter, and
we can look at lots of numeric features.
So we can look at,
am I a long word or a short word?
So, abbreviations tend to be relatively
short acronyms, tend to be very short.
And I can use very sophisticated features,
so I can say,
let's look at the word I'm looking
at right now, take this word, and
ask in a corpus that I've already know
where the sentence boundaries are,
how often is this word occur with
a period at the end of a sentence.
Is this the kind of word
that ends a sentence?
Is this a kind of word, for example,
the tends to start a sentence,
this is the word, the word,
this phrase, for example, the word,
the, after a period, very likely to
be a capital, The, after a period,
very likely to start a sentence,
the space in between.
So, this will have a high probability
of being a start of a sentence, and we
can use these kind of features, depending
on condition on each of the words,
again, to help us in deciding what is or
isn't an end of sentence period.
Now a decision tree is just
an if-then-else statement, so
that's just the definition
of what a decision tree is.
The interesting research
is choosing the features.
So we've seen a number features you
might pick for this particular task.
In general, the structure of a decision
tree is often too hard to build by hand.
In general, hand-building of
decision trees is possible only for
very simple features or simple domains.
You might build a simple
decision tree with six or
seven rules like this for
some simple tasks.
But, it's very hard to do for
numeric features because
you have to pick the threshold for
each of the numeric features.
I'm picking a probability
as one of my features.
I've gotta have a question in the decision
tree, is this probability greater than
some threshold theta or not, and
I've got to set all those thetas.
And so, generally, we use machine learning
that learns the structure of the tree and
learns things like the threshold for
each of the questions that we're asking.
Nonetheless, the questions in a decision
tree, we can think of them as the kind of
features that could be exploited
by any other kind of classifier,
whether it's logistic regression,
or SVM, or neural nets,
some of the classifiers
we'll talk about later.
So, this intuition that we can build
a classifier, we can derive features that
are good predictors of whether a period
is acting as an end of sentence or not.
And then we can put these features
into any kind of classifier, holds for
whatever classifier
we're going to be using.